---
layout: default
title: "ECON304: Economic Development"
course_description: "This course examines the historical evolution of theories related to economic development, focusing on the social, political, and economic processes of transition from underdeveloped or less developed nation to developed nations."
next: ../Unit02
previous: ../Intro
---
**Unit 1: What Is Economic Development?** <span id="1"></span> 
*The meaning of the term economic development is not as clear as you
might expect. As we learned in earlier economics courses, economies are
complex. Many internal and external factors impact whether an economy is
able to grow, provide employment to its working-age population, and
reduce poverty. Furthermore, different people may hold different views
as to what constitutes development. Some may believe that development
means higher incomes. Others might believe that development is a change
in the structure of society or institutions. Still others might consider
development an improvement in the health and education outcomes of a
given population. Economics tells us that all of these factors are
important in defining economic development population; thus, before
considering the major theories of economic development, it is important
to understand the key terms and concepts used in the literature of
economic development and to determine what is meant by these
concepts.*  
  
 *Development is not simply growth; it is economic growth plus
sustainable changes in people’s quality of life. Economists usually
measure economic growth in terms of the rate at which GDP changes over
time. There is little argument about this measure of growth. A high real
GDP growth relative to population growth is necessary to provide
schools, hospitals, housing, and adequate nutrition. However, a high per
capita GDP growth is not sufficient; it must be accompanied by
structural changes that improve welfare. Therein lies the difference
between economic growth and economic development. It is important to
understand the factors that promote this growth, but it is just as
important to understand the factors that change people’s quality of
life, allowing people to make choices and to participate in the
economy.*

**Unit 1 Time Advisory**  
Completing this unit should take you approximately 12 hours.  
  
 ☐    Subunit 1.1: 3.5 hours  
  
 ☐    Subunit 1.2: 1.25 hours  
  
 ☐    Subunit 1.3: 3.25 hours  
  
 ☐    Subunit 1.4: 1.5 hours  
  
 ☐    Subunit 1.5: 0.5 hours  
  
 ☐    Discussion: 2 hours

**Unit1 Learning Outcomes**  
Upon successful completion of this unit, you should be able to:
-   define *economic development*;
-   distinguish between economic growth and economic development;
-   identify some of the stylized facts of developing countries;
-   discuss the link between population growth and economic development;
    and
-   explain the link between income, poverty, and income distribution. 

**1.1 Origin of the Concept of Economic Development** <span
id="1.1"></span> 
*The idea and process of* economic development *involves the deliberate
manipulation of forces within the control of humans to alter economic
outcomes instead of accepting what nature provides by way of sustenance
as inevitable. Some argue that one major reason for underdevelopment is
the fatalistic attitude of people who live in poor countries and their
unwillingness to alter what has been. A recent paper by Easterly and
Levine suggests that a great amount of economic development today is the
result of European settlement outside Europe. The argument goes that
these settlements “shaped institutional, educational, technological,
cultural, and economic outcomes.” (2012) As with many theories, or
rather hypotheses, in economic development, this one is not easy to
accept. For many in the developing world, this smacks of Eurocentricism.
Nonetheless, casual and empirical observations suggest that education
introduced by European settlers had a lot to do with changing the
fatalistic attitude of many traditional societies, ushering in human
capital development in ways that had not been the case before. As you
read through the various texts, you will come across many ideas that may
sound self-serving to one group or the other. Your ability to discern
what may be correct, based on empirical evidence is as much a part of
your education as your knowledge of the various theories.*

**1.1.1 Defining Development** <span id="1.1.1"></span> 
*By the time you finish reading this section, you should feel
comfortable defining economic growth and economic development as well as
distinguishing between the two. The piece titled “Approach to
Development” is a good opener, and the exercise should help you
appreciate the fact that development is a process, a continuum of
changes which eventually brings a country to a point at which it is
classified as developed. As a continuum, one can always argue about the
precise point at which developing has ended and developed has begun. The
US is obviously a developed country, yet some parts of it are no
different from a typical developing country. Azerbaijan, Brazil, China,
India, and South Africa are all developing countries but some parts of
these countries can hardly be called developing.*

-   **Activity: Connexions: Siyavula Uploaders’ “Approach to
    Development”**
    Link: Connexions: Siyavula Uploaders’ [“Approach to
    Development”](https://resources.saylor.org/archived/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/ECON304-1.1.1-ApproachtoDevelopment.pdf) (PDF)  
      
     Instructions: Read the brief introductory information for a
    definition of *developing countries* and *developed countries*.
    Complete the activities, which will help you practice identifying
    which countries are developed and which are not. Once you’ve
    completed Activities 1–3, you may check your response against the
    answer key in the “Memorandum” section.  
      
     Completing this activity should take approximately 2 hours.  
      
     Terms of Use: This article is released under a [Creative Commons
    Attribution 3.0
    License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/). It is
    attributed to Siyavula Uploaders, and the original version can be
    found [here](http://cnx.org/content/m21526/latest/).

-   **Reading: The World Bank’s *Beyond Economic Growth*: “What Is
    Development?”**
    Link: The World Bank’s *Beyond Economic Growth*: [“What Is
    Development?”](https://resources.saylor.org/archived/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/Beyond-Economic-Growth-Student-Book.pdf) (PDF)  
        
     Instructions: Read this chapter for an overview on development. For
    further clarification on issues raised in this chapter, please refer
    to the accompanying
    [glossary](http://www.worldbank.org/depweb/english/beyond/global/glossary.html).
    This article introduces the concept of development, providing both
    what might be considered the traditional and more modern definitions
    of development.  
        
     Reading this chapter should take approximately 30 minutes.  
        
     Terms of Use: This material has been reposted by the kind
    permission of the World Bank, and the original version can be found
    [here](http://www.worldbank.org/depweb/english/beyond/global/chapter1.html).
    Please note that this material is under copyright and cannot be
    reproduced in any capacity without explicit permission from the
    copyright holder.

**1.1.2 Historical Foundations of Theories of Economic Development**
<span id="1.1.2"></span> 
*The perennial effort to live from one day to the next without the fear
of hunger or danger has always preoccupied humankind. Societies have
always sought ways to overcome these obstacles. They did so by
organizing in ways they felt would give them the best chance of
survival. Some were more successful than others. The successful ones
gave economists the impetus to study them and apply lessons to others.
Our economic systems are ways of organizing production activities.
Sometimes it is not easy to differentiate the way we govern ourselves
from the way we organize productive activities. From feudalism to
capitalism to communism and in between, the social system has been as
much about government as about allocating the scarce resources. The
piece below traces the historical origins of economic development.*

-   **Reading: University of Iowa, Center for International Finance and
    Development: E-Book on International Finance & Development: Ricardo
    Contreras’ “How the Concept of Development Got Started”**
    Link: University of Iowa, Center for International Finance and
    Development: *E-Book on International Finance &
    Development: *Ricardo Contreras’ [“How the Concept of Development
    Got
    Started”](http://web.archive.org/web/20120828025907/http://blogs.law.uiowa.edu/ebook/uicifd-ebook/part-1-i-how-concept-development-got-started) (HTML
    or PDF)  
      
     Instructions: Read this chapter, which traces the historical
    foundations of the current debate on economic development from the
    13<sup>th</sup> to the 20<sup>th</sup> centuries. Pay particular
    attention to the forces behind the emergence of the
    classical/neo-classical tradition and the historical materialism
    school. You can access the PDF by choosing the “Download PDF” link
    next to the Adobe Icon at the top of the article.  
      
     Reading this chapter should take approximately 1 hour.  
      
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpages above.

**1.2 Comparing Levels of Development between Regions of the World**
<span id="1.2"></span> 
*Although the term developing countries refers to a group of countries,
no two countries are alike. The stylized facts of developing countries
fit them in aggregate, but on just about any measure of development, you
will find that some of the facts do not apply to some of the countries.
Some developing countries experience frequent extreme poverty and
hunger, whereas others rarely do. Some developing countries have low
literacy rates, whereas others have high literacy rates. Some have low
doctors per thousand of population, whereas others do not. The contrast
between development and the absence of development will be between the
poor developing countries and rich developed countries. The UK is a
developed country compared to Ethiopia, but how does Ethiopia compare to
say Haiti? They are both developing countries, and in regard to some
measures, Ethiopia will do better and on others Haiti may do better than
Ethiopia.*

-   **Reading: The World Bank’s *Beyond Economic Growth*: “Comparing
    Levels of Development”**
    Link: The World Bank’s *Beyond Economic Growth:* [“Comparing Levels
    of
    Development”](https://resources.saylor.org/archived/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/Comparing-Levels-of-Development.pdf) (PDF)  
        
     Instructions: Read this chapter, which explains how different
    regions throughout the world compare on common measures of levels of
    development.  
        
     Reading this chapter should take approximately 30 minutes.  
        
     Terms of Use: This material has been reposted by the kind
    permission of the World Bank, and the original version can be found
    [here](http://www.worldbank.org/depweb/english/beyond/global/chapter2.html). Please
    note that this material is under copyright and cannot be reproduced
    in any capacity without explicit permission from the copyright
    holder.

-   **Guest Lecture: YouTube: TED Talks’ “Hans Rosling Shows the Best
    Stats You’ve Ever Seen”**
    Link: YouTube: TED Talks’ [“Hans Rosling Shows the Best Stats You’ve
    Ever Seen”](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vTqZaRSctHc) (YouTube)  
      
     Instructions: Listen to this guest lecture for a brief comparison
    of how individual nations compare to each other in terms of
    development. Keep in mind that this is just an overview; try to
    identify other aspects that would make for good comparison points
    between nations.  
      
     Watching this lecture and pausing to take notes should take
    approximately 45 minutes.  
      
     Terms of Use: This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons
    Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 3.0
    License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/). It is
    attributed to TED, and the original version can be found
    [here](http://www.ted.com/talks/hans_rosling_shows_the_best_stats_you_ve_ever_seen.html).

**1.3 Population Growth in the Developing World** <span
id="1.3"></span> 
*Population growth is both a boon and a bane for economic development.
First, it is from the population that society derives the labor force.
Thus, without population growth, this essential factor of production
will dwindle. Second, it is from the population that society derives
entrepreneurs with the qualities to take risks and to organize
production. On the other hand, if the population grows too quickly, it
poses problems. The population must be cared for, be educated over a
long period, be made ready for participation in economic activity, and
be prepared to take care of the aging. Is there an ideal population
growth rate? Are the poor countries poor because the populations are
growing too fast? These are important issues of interest to the
development economist. *

-   **Reading: The World Bank’s *Beyond Economic Growth*: “World
    Population Growth”**
    Link: The World Bank’s *Beyond Economic Growth*: [“World Population
    Growth”](https://resources.saylor.org/archived/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/World-Population-Growth.pdf) (PDF)  
      
     Instructions: Read this chapter, which explains the importance of
    population growth in the dynamics of development and
    underdevelopment. This article also shows how recent trends in
    population growth differ between regions in the world.  
      
     Reading this chapter should take approximately 30 minutes.  
      
     Terms of Use: This material has been reposted by the kind
    permission of the World Bank, and the original version can be found
    [here](http://www.worldbank.org/depweb/english/beyond/global/chapter3.html). Please
    note that this material is under copyright and cannot be reproduced
    in any capacity without explicit permission from the copyright
    holder.

-   **Guest Lecture: YouTube: TED Talks’ “Hans Rosling: Asia’s Rise –
    How and When”**
    Link: YouTube: TED Talks’ [“Hans Rosling: Asia’s Rise – How and
    When”](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vdcy0-smXTE) (YouTube)  
      
     Instructions: Watch this lecture. The idea that poorer countries’
    income per capita will grow faster than richer countries’ income per
    capita is known as *convergence*. Does that mean that eventually all
    countries will converge to the same level of income? The rate at
    which China, India, and Brazil have been growing has led several
    people to conclude that eventually China will have a higher (per
    capita) income than the US. In this invigorating guest lecture, the
    speaker compares the growth of US to the growth of emerging nations
    such as China and India and makes some predictions about when these
    economies are likely to catch up to the US economy. He also points
    out existing roadblocks in these economies. As you listen, think
    about the factors that promote and inhibit growth.   
      
     Watching this lecture and pausing to take notes should take
    approximately 45 minutes.  
      
     Terms of Use: This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons
    Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 3.0
    License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/). It is
    attributed to TED, and the original version can be found
    [here](http://www.ted.com/talks/lang/eng/hans_rosling_asia_s_rise_how_and_when.html).

-   **Guest Lecture: YouTube: TED Talks’ “Martin Jacques: Understanding
    the Rise of China”**
    Link: YouTube: TED Talks’ [“Martin Jacques: Understanding the Rise
    of China”](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rmEMfb4t6Js) (YouTube)  
      
     Instructions: Watch this lecture. You previously listened to Hans
    Rosling’s talk on the rise of Asia. In this lecture, Martin Jacques
    talks about China’s road to success. Jacques explains the factors
    that render the country distinct from its western counterparts, the
    reasons that have led to its success, and the factors that will
    determine its future.  
        
     Watching this lecture and pausing to take notes should take
    approximately 45 minutes.  
      
     Terms of Use: This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons
    Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 3.0
    License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/). It is
    attributed to TED, and the original version can be found
    [here](http://www.ted.com/talks/martin_jacques_understanding_the_rise_of_china.html).

-   **Reading: The World Bank’s *Beyond Economic Growth*: “Economic
    Growth Rates”**
    Link: The World Bank’s *Beyond Economic Growth:* [“Economic Growth
    Rates”](https://resources.saylor.org/archived/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/ECON104-1.3-EconomicGrowthRates.pdf) (PDF)  
        
     Instructions: Read this chapter, which tracks trends in economic
    growth according to a number of classifications including geography,
    natural resource endowment, and income level. When reviewing this
    reading, start to consider the origin of the differences in economic
    growth rates for these different countries.  
      
     Reading this chapter should take approximately 30 minutes.  
        
     Terms of Use: This material has been reposted by the kind
    permission of the World Bank, and the original version can be found
    [here](http://www.worldbank.org/depweb/english/beyond/global/chapter4.html). Please
    note that this material is under copyright and cannot be reproduced
    in any capacity without explicit permission from the copyright
    holder.

-   **Guest Lecture: YouTube: TED Talks’ “Nandan Nilekani’s Ideas for
    India’s Future”**
    Link: YouTube: TED Talks’ [“Nandan Nilekani’s Ideas for India’s
    Future”](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-PKDIXVTfUA) (YouTube)  
      
     Instructions: Watch this lecture. This lecture introduces another
    case study in the context of a developing country’s recent
    growth. In this guest lecture, the speaker presents four categories
    of ideas that help shape the development of a nation. He explains
    these ideas in the context of India’s progress and emphasizes those
    that are important for its continued progress.  
      
     Watching this lecture and pausing to take notes should take
    approximately 45 minutes.  
      
     Terms of Use: This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons
    Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 3.0
    License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/). It is
    attributed to TED, and the original version can be found
    [here](http://www.ted.com/talks/nandan_nilekani_s_ideas_for_india_s_future.html).

**1.4 Poverty and Income Inequality** <span id="1.4"></span> 
*Per capita GDP is not always a good measure of the level of poverty or
of wealth. First, many development practitioners consider poverty to be
multi-dimensional, meaning that is it not only defined by how much
income a household has to spend. Second, GDP per capita does not
consider the impact of inequality in the distribution of income, which
may mask problems of poverty. A high per capita GDP may be distributed
such that a small fraction of the population gets a large fraction of
the income. This may result in a large percentage of the population
being poor even though the country has a high per capita GDP. Economists
have come up with an ingenuous way of measuring this concept by using
the Lorenz curve. The Lorenz curve is a square graph with the cumulative
percent of income on the vertical axis and the cumulative percent of the
population receiving the cumulative percent of income on horizontal
axis. For example, if the first 20 percent of the population receives 20
percent of income, then the coordinates will put that point on the line
45o from the origin (the line from the origin which bisects the 90
degree angle). If the first 20 percent of the population receives 5% of
the income, then the coordinates will be below the 45o line. Zero
percent of the population will receive zero percent of the income, and
naturally 100 percent of the population will receive 100 percent of
income; thus, if we plot the coordinates of the cumulative percentage of
population against the percent of income it receives, then the line will
start from the origin and end at the vertex of the parallel to the
horizontal axis and the line parallel to the vertical axis. Now, if the
bottom 20 percent of the population receives 5% of the cumulative income
and the bottom 40% receives 25% of cumulative income, then these points
will lie below the 45o line. If we continued till we have covered 100
percent of the population and 100 percent of income, we would have a new
line which lies below the 45o line. The area between this line and the
45o line divided by the area formed by the triangle to the left of the
45o line is called the Gini Coefficient (named after Corrado Gini, a
mathematician). This coefficient gives us a sense of the distribution of
income. If the coefficient is zero, then there is equal distribution of
income or perfect distribution of income. The bigger the coefficient,
the more unequal income is distributed.*

-   **Reading: The World Bank’s *Beyond Economic Growth*: “Income
    Inequality” and “Poverty and Hunger”**
    Link: The World Bank’s *Beyond Economic Growth:* [“Income
    Inequality”](https://resources.saylor.org/archived/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/Income-Inequality.pdf) (PDF)
    and [“Poverty and
    Hunger”](https://resources.saylor.org/archived/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/Poverty-and-Hunger.pdf) (PDF)  
      
     Instructions: Read these articles. The first article describes a
    number of definitions of poverty and analyzes variations in poverty
    globally. The second article compares inequality differentials
    between countries and examines what impact inequality might have on
    economic growth.  
      
     Reading these articles should take approximately 45 minutes.  
      
     Terms of Use: The articles above have been reposted by the kind
    permission of World Bank and can be viewed in their original forms
    [here](http://www.worldbank.org/depweb/english/beyond/global/chapter5.html) and
    [here](http://www.worldbank.org/depweb/english/beyond/global/chapter6.html).
    Please note that this material is under copyright and cannot be
    reproduced in any capacity without explicit permission from the
    copyright holder.

-   **Guest Lecture: YouTube: TED Talks’ “Paul Collier on the ‘Bottom
    Billion’”**
    Link: YouTube: TED Talks’ [“Paul Collier on the ‘Bottom
    Billion’”](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dxcdEL73INQ) (YouTube)  
      
     Instructions: Watch this lecture. In this guest lecture, the
    speaker, economist Paul Collier, contends that the fundamental
    challenge of development at present is to find a way to give hope to
    the billion people that have been stuck in stagnant economies. In
    this regard, he advances a bold, compassionate plan for closing the
    gap between the rich and the poor.  
      
     Watching this lecture and pausing to take notes should take
    approximately 45 minutes.  
      
     Terms of Use: This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons
    Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 3.0
    License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/). It is
    attributed to TED, and the original version can be found
    [here](http://www.ted.com/talks/paul_collier_shares_4_ways_to_help_the_bottom_billion.html).

**1.5 Industrialization in the Developing World** <span
id="1.5"></span> 
-   **Reading: The World Bank’s *Beyond Economic Growth*:
    “Industrialization and Postindustrialization”**
    Link: The World Bank’s *Beyond Economic Growth:* [“Industrialization
    and
    Postindustrialization”](https://resources.saylor.org/archived/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/Industrialization-and-Postindustrialization.pdf) (PDF)  
      
     Instructions: Read this chapter, which looks at how the structure
    of countries’ economies tends to change over the course of the
    development process. Following the decolonization of most of the
    developing world after WWII, many former colonized poor countries
    saw their path to development in terms of industrialization.
    Therefore, these countries embarked on extensive industrialization.
    Along with the issue of industrialization as a means to develop was
    whether the process was to be government led or private sector led.
    If it was to be government led, how was it to be financed? In Latin
    America, some countries decided that it was to be government led and
    its deficit financed. The result was a period of rapid inflation and
    poor economic performance. This text is a primer on the subject.
    While reading this text, consider how this evolution has differed
    during various historical periods and how new technologies will
    impact this change in the future.  
      
     Reading this chapter should take approximately 30 minutes.  
      
     Terms of Use: This material has been reposted by the kind
    permission of the World Bank, and the original version can be found
    [here](http://www.worldbank.org/depweb/english/beyond/global/chapter9.html). Please
    note that this material is under copyright and cannot be reproduced
    in any capacity without explicit permission from the copyright
    holder.

**Unit 1 Activity** <span id="1.6"></span> 
-   **Activity: The Saylor Foundation’s “ECON304 Course Discussion
    Board”**
    Link: The Saylor Foundation’s [“ECON304 Course Discussion
    Board”](http://forums.saylor.org/forum/economics/econ304/)  
      
     Instructions: After reviewing the course materials for this unit,
    please respond to the following questions by posting to the course
    discussion board. Please feel free to start your own discussions as
    well as review and respond to other students’ postings.  
      
     1.    Economic growth is more important than economic development.
    Economic development is more important than economic growth. Which
    do you think is more important, and why? Provide supporting evidence
    for your reasons.  
      
     2.    People who live in developing countries are by definition
    poor. Why might this be true or why might this be false? Explain
    your reasons.  
      
     Completing this activity should take approximately 2 hours.


